Arousing Bodhicitta

by Yukhok Chatralwa Chöying Rangdrol

Bodhicitta is that which makes the path of Mahāyāna special, and you should know its benefits,
as well as how to take the vow, and the precepts and so on, all in precise detail.

Consider that you and all other beings are seated before the field of merit, visualized just
as in the refuge practice, and, with a firm resolve to take the vow of bodhicitta, recite
the words of the text:

Ho! Mesmerized by the sheer variety of perceptions, which are like the illusory reflections
of the moon in water,Beings wander endlessly astray in saṃsāra's vicious cycle,In order that
they may find comfort and ease in the luminosity and all-pervading space of the true nature
of their minds,I generate the immeasurable love, compassion, joy, and equanimity of theawakened
mind, the heart of bodhicitta.

Repeat these lines three times or as many times as possible. The initial syllable ‘Ho’ is an
expression of wonder or amazement. What is so wonderful and amazing? Generating bodhicitta
out of a state complete with the four immeasurable qualities, so that all sentient beings
may find comfort and ease in the luminosity and all-pervading space of the true nature of
their minds. That is amazing. Others say that this is an expression of compassion, in which
case the objects of our compassion are all suffering beings. Then there are those who
say it is an expression of sadness.

Sentient beings experience all kinds of happiness and suffering as a result of the various actions
they have committed in the past. These mistaken experiences in their own minds are
just like the reflections of the moon in water: they appear, but when examined, they are not
real. Neither subject nor object is to be found at the time of the fundamental ground or
at the time of the ultimate result. So these temporary delusory appearances, which are false
and deceptive, are just like a variety of paintings created by the diversity of our own
past actions. As it is said, “Karma is like an artist.” Even a single body of water will
be perceived differently by the beings of the six classes, as a result of their particular
karma and habitual tendencies, and as long as they have this dualistic deluded mind, beings
will continue to wander endlessly astray in saṃsāra's vicious cycle.

Now we are practising so that they might be freed from their karmic vision and habitual patterns,
and arrive at the luminosity and all-pervading space of the true nature of their minds,
reaching the level of buddhahood, where they will find comfort, ease and relief from all
the exhaustions and hardships brought about by their own non-virtues. To this end, we generate
immeasurable compassion, which is the wish that they may be freed from suffering and
its causes, together with its cause, immeasurable equanimity, which is the wish that they
may be freed from attachment to close friends and family and aversion to enemies. Likewise,
we generate immeasurable love, which is the wish that they may have happiness and its
causes, and immeasurable joy, which is the wish that they may never be separated from happiness
and its causes. With the force of the compassion born of the first two immeasurables,
we focus on all sentient beings throughout the whole of space. Then with the latter two
qualities, we focus on complete enlightenment with the strength ofwisdom—wishing, with immeasurable
love, that they gain the very highest form of happiness by attaining the dharmakāya
luminosity, and wishing, with immeasurable joy, that they never part from it.

Having trained our minds in these four immeasurable qualities again and again, we generate the
bodhicitta of aspiration, by saying to ourselves: “In order to bring all sentient beings
to the lasting happiness of complete liberation, I will do whatever I can to attain the
precious level of perfect buddhahood.” And we generate the bodhicitta of application, thinking:
“To that end, I will train in the vast activity of the bodhisattvas, represented by
this profound path, and strive with diligence until not a single being is left behind in saṃsāra.”

To make the practice more elaborate, at this point we could practise considering others as equal
to ourselves and exchanging ourselves and others. In particular, it is crucially important
that we focus on giving away our own happiness as we breathe out and taking on the sufferings
of others as we breathe in—the practice of ‘giving and receiving’ or tonglen—and
that we meditate as much as we possibly can on absolute bodhicitta, the union of tranquillity
(śamatha) and insight (vipaśyanā), in which there is certainty regarding the selflessness
of individuals and of phenomena.

In the biography of the precious lord Atiśa it is told how, having arrived in Tibet, he said
to Geshe Tönpa and others:

If you lack bodhicitta, then whatever you do, whether listening to many teachings, studying,
reflecting, meditating, practising the generation and completion phases, meditating on the
view of Madhyamaka, or reciting mantras and such, it will be of no use. All virtuous actions
that are not combined with bodhicitta and all virtuous actions that weaken our bodhicitta
are the agency of Māra.

At the end of the session, consider that you and all sentient beings dissolve into the objects
of refuge. They dissolve into the lama in the centre. He, in turn, dissolves into the primordial
expanse of the dharmakāya, free from any conceptual elaboration, and you rest in
meditation. Alternatively, you could consider that, at the end of the session, the field
of merit melts into light, beginning at its outer edges, and then dissolves into the lama
in the centre. He too melts into light, and dissolves into you at the crown of your head.
Through this, the absolute bodhicitta present within their minds arises vividly in your own
mind, and you dedicate the merit.

As the precepts of the bodhicitta of aspiration, train in considering others as equal to yourself,
exchanging yourself and others, and considering others as more important than yourself.
As the precepts of the bodhicitta of application, train in the six transcendent perfections.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2006 (revised 2012). Thanks to Ringu Tulku Rinpoche for his clarifications.

Main » Next